# Discussion and evaluation

## Discussion & Highlights of Research Findings

This research project allowed us to move beyond the economic dimension and incorporate more perspectives into analysis. We looked into a relatively large time scale covering the past 30 years, using open data accessible online. Each of the three dimensions of human development conception (i.e. Health, Education, and Standard of Living) is analysed separately in relation to the energy aspect in the context of Lebanon. Some of our findings yield information conforming to our hypothesis, whereas, others contradict it.

During the stage of primary investigation on Lebanon data, we found that in most scenarios there is no relevance of the application of linear regression model on the data, in other words, a linear correlation is unlikely to exist - whether between total energy supply per capita and each of the dependent variables, or between total electricity generation per capita and expected years of schooling. However, it is worth noting that through performing linear regression and analysing the associated correlation coefficients (i.e., Pearson and Kendall tau coefficients) and regression statistics (i.e. p-values and R-squared values), **we have found a statistically significant, strong positive linear (even monotonic) relationship existing between EG per capita & GNI per capita, EG per capita & life expectancy in Lebanon from 1990 to 2019**. These research findings are further supported when the relatively distinct groupings of years are obtained by executing clustering on the corresponding min-max rescaled data, although in some other cases the data are not strongly clustered, i.e., there is a high degree of randomness of implementing clustering technique (implied by the data visualisations and the low Silhouette scores). But a caveat should be made: This research project finds a strong positive *correlation* only; there might be a fallacy to interpret any *causation*. In both cases, the two variables are not causally related; more electricity generation per capita does not cause GNI or Life expectancy to rise. Future investigation is needed to determine whether there is a causal link between the variables for Lebanon and what the nature of that link is.

Reflecting on the results of the complementary investigation, where we iterated the steps to perform correlation, linear regression and clustering, and conducted analysis on data collected for Jordan, it turned out that: similarly to the previous findings obtained from Lebanon data, indeed **the variable of electricity generation per capita is strongly correlated to two of the dependent variables - GNI per capita (‘the standard of living’ dimension) and life expectancy (‘health’ dimension) where a genuine positive linear (even monotonic) relationship emerged in both cases for Jordan from 1990 to 2019**. Likewise, these findings are accompanied and confirmed by the informative clustering outcomes with relatively high Silhouette scores. This conforms to our hypothesis, i.e., arguably the identified relationship is not unique to Lebanon only rather likely to be uncovered in other countries sharing similar experiences of energy crisis. Additionally, it should be highlighted that in the case of Jordan from 1990 to 2019, a statistically significant and relatively strong linear correlation also stands between ‘Total energy supply per capita’ and 'Expected years of schooling’, which does not arise in the case of Lebanon.

Concerning the practical implications of this project, our research has presented a quantitative basis for the widely accepted view that the generation of electricity (one essential energy form) has a significant correlation to the social welfare of residents in Lebanon. This suggests that the country’s electricity generation capacity indeed deserves substantial focus in governmental policies especially those related to macroeconomic and health, as echoed by the recent Ahram Online news report (2021) that on 28 December 2021 Lebanon’s Energy Minister launched pipeline renovation to import Egyptian natural gas with the aim to “improve electricity production” in local power plants.

## Limitations

We decided to only study the aspects of energy supply and electricity generation for each year. This angle can be considered too restrictive. As the paper of Bergasse et al. (2013) suggests that both energy sectors and energy consumption have “quantitative and qualitative importance” in the socio-economic development of the economies, the perspective of consumption side or other important energy forms could be pursued in future research to complement the results of our analysis.

Inspired by the Human Development Index (HDI) conception, we selected three dimensions to measure human development in Lebanon and in Jordan as well for comparison purposes. Like other coined index, inevitably the HDI has some limitations and criticisms, for example, it “simplifies and captures only part of what human development entails” as recognised by UNDP (n.d.), thus, analysis of other indicators are required if aiming to see a fuller picture of Lebanon’s level of human development in relation to the energy aspect. Moreover, the paper of Salti et al. (2021) strongly argued that available most commonly used indices including HDI provide an incomplete account of development in Lebanon in the sense that they cannot be expanded to cover refugee populations who due to their legal status are “largely excluded from regular data collection processes” and thus excluded from national development and well-being indicators, whilst “Lebanon has the highest rate of refugees per capita in the world”. The lack of inclusion of refugee groups in the data might explain why in some cases of our research there is no clear correlation or data pattern between the paired variables which we expected to see. This appears to be a specially valuable field for future research on this subject matter. More tailored wellbeing indicators could be selected to measure the well-being of the often overlooked refugee population, from which insights generated could complement the findings derived from this research.

In our research, we collected high-quality data from reliable sources (IEA, World Bank and UNDP official websites). They are all aggregated data and are used ethically. Due to the weakness of the national statistical system on energy in Lebanon (Moisseron and Guesmi, 2018), however, the data used for conducting our research is quite subject to open accessibility e.g. the data for the variables we eventually selected and used cannot be found for years earlier than 1990; statistics on the city level that we intended to explore is also unavailable for Lebanon. This poses potential venues for future studies to pursue when more open data will be hopefully attainable. The approaches to data analysis and visualisation we adopted in this research project could also be applied to the data collected for the more developed countries and regions to generate new insights.
