# Data collection - Which datasets do we use and why?

Based on all the contextual information given before, to approach our research question, we selected several variables and collected data for each of them.

## Two independent variables
According to previous studies conducted by the Global Energy Assessment (2012), there is a strong correlation between energy use and HDI, especially in countries with lower income levels like Lebanon. A few extra hours of extra light can lead to significant increase in productivity, hence positively impacting the economy and social wellbeing. Concerning that the energy crisis has been causing frequent blackouts in Lebanon, we believed that electricity, one of the essential forms of energy supply, deserves detailed exploration alone. We, therefore, chose both total energy supply per capita and total electricity generation per capita as independent variables with reliable data provided by International Energy Agency (IEA) official website. But the free data is only available for download in 5-year intervals. Thus, we scratched the value for each data point from the IEA website and inputed them into the Excel files manually. ‘Per capita’ data is used to reflect the actual amount of energy supply and electricity supply available to an average Lebanese resident in each year, so as to avoid this being impacted or concealed by the confounding factors like yearly population growth. IEA website only provides data for ‘total electricity generation by source (oil and hydro)’. Thus, to obtain the per capita data needed for research, we manipulated the raw data by adding the ‘total electricity generation by oil’ and ‘total electricity generation by hydro’ for each year from 1990 to 2019, and then dividing the sum by Lebanon total population in that year. This data manipulation process is accomplished using Excel. The data for Lebanon total population is downloaded from the World Bank website.

## Three dependent variables
To measure the social wellbeing, we originally intended to collect data for Human Development Index (HDI) for Lebanon. But the issue - a major challenge that we encountered during the process of data collection - is that the HDI data for Lebanon from 1990 to 2019 is not freely available online. There is one source that provides open HDI data only starting from 2005. Regarding that this might limit the time resolution and the extent to which the research question can be answered, we, as advocates for open data, decided to collect and to use data separately for each of the three key dimensions of human development, namely, ‘Health’, ‘Eduction’ and ‘Standard of Living’. We measured them by three variables, respectively, life expectancy at birth, expected years of schooling for children of school entering age, gross national income per capita, with data easily accessible and downloadable from the Human Development Report of United Nations Development Programme (UNDP).

All data used for primary investigation (the main focus of our research) are for Lebanon from 1990 to 2019. Choosing the research timeframe as many as 30 years rather than less, left us with a large enough database to perform a solid analysis.

To conduct our complementary investigation, data for exactly the same variables are collected for Jordan from the same sources mentioned above.

## Below is the list of all variables we have included in our data analysis and their definitions.
1. Total energy supply per capita: The amount of energy supply available to an average Lebanese resident.
2. Total electricity generation per capita: The amount of electricity generated by oil and hydro available to an average Lebanese resident.
3. Life expectancy at birth (years): Number of years of schooling that a child of school entrance age can expect to receive if prevailing patterns of age-specific enrolment rates persist throughout the child's life.
4. Expected years of schooling (years): Number of years of schooling that a child of school entrance age can expect to receive if prevailing patterns of age-specific enrolment rates persist throughout the child's life.
5. Gross National Income (GNI) per capita (constant 2017 PPP$): Aggregate income of an economy generated by its production and its ownership of factors of production, less the incomes paid for the use of factors of production owned by the rest of the world, converted to international dollars using PPP rates, divided by midyear population.
Lebanon total population, Jordan total population: Total population is based on the de facto definition of population, which counts all residents regardless of legal status or citizenship. The values shown are midyear estimates.
